This specific part of the Akbarnama takes place while Akbar is travelling to oversee his empire.
He’s on his way to deal with a conflict posed by one of his generals, Khan Zaman.
This is when he passes through a town named Karra, situated off the Ganges river.
Akbar and his court were in high spirits and so they were celebrating at one of his homes next to the Jamna river.
This piece was made with opaque watercolour and gold on paper through the combined efforts of Kanha and Nanha, two of the many artists who worked in Akbar’s Mughal court during his reign.
In total, at least 40 different artists contributed to the Akbarnama.
A translation of the original text can be found in ‘The Akbarnama of Abul Fazl Volume 3.’
What’s strange is that the corresponding text in the translation is very minimal – we don’t get very many details there.
According to the translation, “From thence he turned his rein towards Karra, which is on the Ganges.
As the suburbs of the city became the place of his encampment he turned his attention to hunting in the neighbourhood.
It chanced that he spent several days in that delightful land
So why did Akbar feel the need to have his court artists paint this scene?
Well, Akbar had a fascination with combat technology and especially with the production of firearms.
In fact, it’s paintings like this that have allowed historians to study the particular weaponry from this era.
The amount of detail in this image lets us get a closer look at all the traditional war techniques and technologies from the Mughal Empire.
For example, the men in the image are armed with bows and arrows, guns, spears, shields, and much more.
Some members of the army on the right are riding on horses and elephants, which were both used as a mode of transport during war.
They also have an assortment of shields, banners, guns, bows and arrows, helmets, armour, as well as assistants and portable architectures to boost the movement of this large procession.
Certain hand gestures were integrated into manuscripts of the time to show that a character was speaking and here, several different men seem to be giving directions to a portion of the soldiers.
The army on the left side has similar weapons, but they don’t need animals for transport and they have some built in home defense features such as what appear to be cannons popping out of the building and pots lined along the walls of the structure.
The artists of this folio are two “Indian miniature painters” - Kanha, who was the outliner, and Nanha, who was the painter.
Kanha also outlined the accompanying piece of this two-part image, which was painted by a different artist named Nandi.
Kanha’s work is most recognised for his artistic approach to animal life. Before he outlined and contributed to images of wars and battles in the Akbarnama, animals were Khana’s main area of practise.
Some of his animal-themed work appears in the Baburnama or the “Book of Babur.” Babur was the first ruler of the Mughal Empire and Akbar’s grandfather
Here, the animals in this image are woven in with the action of the battle.
There is an elaborately dressed battle elephant in the middle right area of the image.
Its trunk is stretched over the large army, possibly Akbar’s army since they dominate a majority of the image and seem to be attacking some kind of settlement.
Further down and also leading the charge are the warhorses.
Their armour consists of variations of gold and black, which could be a metal covering used to protect the animals.
The fish and crocodiles in the Ganges appear to be engaged in their own battle, chasing each other upstream.
This mini-conflict joins the white expanse of the river with the overall battle scene.
The scene has been linked to its surrounding landscape and battle seems to be a common part of nature in this image
There is a theory that Kanha and Nanha are in fact the same artist because their names sound very similar, and they also share certain artistic traits.
However, this theory has been disproved by a simple red inscription.
Red inscriptions like this one can be found at the bottom of the pages throughout the Akbarnama.
These ones were written in Persian, probably by the librarian of the time in order to indicate the artist or artists who worked on each image.
The inscription on this image includes both Kanha and Nanha’s names and this would only be the case if they were two different artists.
The translation doesn’t say that each army was on a different side of the river, so why does it seem like Akbar’s army has to cross the river to attack their opponents?
Khana’s work in the Akbarnama would come to influence the future of Persian painting because he began this technique of using “a blank middle ground to establish psychological space.”
Therefore, the Ganges river’s centred location is not done to reflect the text, but to give each army its own mental and visual space in the scene.
Kanha also used a “diagonal” direction in his work in order to allow the scene to flow beyond the limits of the margin.
A close observation of the men’s hands on the left side of the image displays this diagonal orientation.
The mind can continue imagining the scene spilling past the confinement of the borders.